segmentation/README.md, before:

# Segmentation

This package aims to provide a generic code based on configuration files
to train a Pytorch neural network on a 3D segmentation task.

## Configuration files
A few configuration files are needed to run the code and should be referenced
in the `main.json` file (the name of the file is not important).

#### main.json
This file references all the configuration files needed to run the code.
```json
{
    "data": "some_path/data.json",
    "transform": "some_path/transform.json",
    "model": "some_path/model.json",
    "run": "some_path/run.json"
}
```
`"data"`, `"transform"`, `and `"model"` are mandatory. Depending on the mode the program is run
in, one additional key is needed:
- `"run"` if mode is `"train"`,`"eval"` or`"infer"`,
- `"visualization"` if mode is`"viz"` (not implemented yet).

#### data.json
This file tells the code where to find the data to use in the segmentation task and the repartition
between train, validation and test data. If `"subject_shuffle"` is `true`, subjects are shuffled
before being assigned to train, validation and test sets. <br>
Either patterns using unix regular expressions or explicit paths can be used to list subjects.
Both can be used at the same time (patterns are read first). <br>
This file also defines the behaviour of the `DataLoader`, using patches or not, the 
number of workers used to load data (`-1` means all available workers are used) and 
the batch size. Finally it sets which keys will be used to retrieve images and labels 
from subjects.
```json
{
    "modalities": 
    {
        "t1": {"type": "intensity"},
        "label": {"type": "label"}
    },
    "patterns": 
    [
        {
            "root": "/path_to_t1/*/",
            "name_pattern": "([0-9]+)", 
            "modalities": {"t1": "/T1w/T1w_acpc_dc.nii.gz"}
        }, 
        {
            "root": "/path_to_label/suj_*/", 
            "name_pattern": "([0-9]+)", 
            "modalities": {"label": "grey.nii.gz"}
        }
    ], 
    "repartition": [0.7, 0.15, 0.15],
    "subject_shuffle": true,
    "subject_seed": 0,
    "image_key_name": "t1",
    "label_key_name": "label",
    "batch_size": 2,
    "num_workers": 0,
    "queue": 
    {
        "attributes": 
        {
            "max_length": 8, 
            "samples_per_volume": 4
        }, 
        "sampler": 
        {
            "name": "LabelSampler",
            "module": "torchio.data.sampler",
            "attributes": 
            {
                "patch_size": 64,
                "label_name": "label",
                "label_probabilities": {"0": 0.1, "1": 0.9}
            }
        }
    },
    "collate_fn": 
    {
        "name": "history_collate",
        "module": "segmentation.collate_functions"
    },
    "batch_shuffle": true,
    "batch_seed": 0
}
```

```json
{
    "modalities": 
    {
        "t1": {"type": "intensity"},
        "label": {"type": "label"}
    },
    "paths": 
    [
        {
            "name": "subject1",
            "modalities": 
            {
                "t1": "/path_to_t1_for_subject1/T1w/T1w_acpc_dc.nii.gz",
                "label": "/path_to_label_for_subject1/grey.nii.gz"
            }
        }, 
        {
            "name": "subject2",
            "modalities": 
            {
                "t1": "/path_to_t1_for_subject2/T1w/T1w_acpc_dc.nii.gz",
                "label": "/path_to_label_for_subject2/grey.nii.gz"
            }
        }
    ], 
    "repartition": [0.7, 0.15, 0.15],
    "subject_shuffle": true,
    "subject_seed": 0,
    "image_key_name": "t1",
    "label_key_name": "label",
    "batch_size": 2,
    "num_workers": 0,
    "batch_shuffle": true,
    "batch_seed": 0
}
```
`"modalities"`, `"batch_size"`, `"image_key_name"` and `"label_key_name"` are mandatory. 
If `"patterns"` are not empty, each pattern must have keys `"root"` and `"modalities"`.
If `"paths"` are not empty, each path must have keys `"name"` and `"modalities"`. 
If `"queue"` is not empty, it must have the attribute `"sampler"` which must have keys
`"name"`, `"module"` and `"attributes"`. In such case, `"attributes"` must define the
attribute `"patch_size"`.


Any modality present in a pattern or a path must be present in `"modalities"` and
each subject must have every modality of `"modalities"`.

#### transform.json
This file defines which transforms (preprocessing and data augmentation) are applied to train,
validation and test samples. The same transforms are applied to validation and test samples.
```json
{
    "train_transforms": 
    [
        {
            "name": "RandomBiasField"
        }, 
        {
            "name": "RandomNoise"
        }, 
        {
            "name": "RandomFlip",
            "attributes": {"axes": [0]}
        },
        {
            "name": "OneOf", 
            "is_selection": "True",
            "transforms":
            [
                {
                    "prob": 0.8, 
                    "transform":
                    {
                        "name":"RandomAffine"
                    }
                }, 
                {
                    "prob": 0.2,
                    "transform":
                    {
                        "name":"RandomElasticDeformation"
                    }
                }
            ]
        }
    ], 
    "val_transforms": []
}
```
`"train_transforms"` and `"val_transforms"` are mandatory.

#### model.json
This file defines the model to use, its parameters and if it is loaded from a saved model.
If attribute `"last_one"` is `true`, it means that last saved model will be used. If no model
has been saved so far, a new model will be used. To use a model saved at a specific path,
`"last_one"` must be set to `false` and `"path"` must be filled with the path to the model.
```json
{
    "module": "unet", 
    "name": "UNet3D", 
    "attributes": 
    {
        "in_channels": 1, 
        "out_classes": 1, 
        "padding": 1, 
        "residual": true, 
        "num_encoding_blocks": 5, 
        "encoder_out_channel_lists": 
        [
            [30, 30, 30], 
            [60, 60, 60], 
            [120, 120, 120], 
            [240, 240, 240], 
            [320, 320, 320]
        ], 
        "decoder_out_channel_lists":
        [
            [240, 240, 240], 
            [120, 120, 120],
            [60, 60, 60],
            [30, 30, 30]
        ]
    },
    "last_one": true,
    "device": "cuda"
}
```

```json
{
    "module": "unet",
    "name": "UNet3D", 
    "last_one": false,
    "path": "/path_to_model"
}
```
`"name"` and `"module"` are mandatory.

#### run.json
This file defines
- the losses used to train the model (`"criteria"`),
- the optimizer (`"optimizer"`),
- the frequency at which logs are printed (`"log_frequency"`),
- how often the performances of the model are saved and which method is used for that (`"save"`),
- how often the model is evaluated on the validation set and which metrics are used to assess the 
quality of the segmentation on the validation set (`"validation"`). The model 
is saved after every evaluation loop on the validation set,
- how often inference on whole images is done, this is relevant only if patches are
 used during training (`"whole_image_inference_frequency"` in `"validation"`, this frequency is
 in number of epochs),
- the number of epochs,
- which methods are used to get tensors from data.
```json
{
    "criteria": 
    [
        {
            "module": "segmentation.losses.dice_loss", 
            "name": "Dice",
            "method": "mean_dice_loss"
        }
    ], 
    "optimizer": 
    {
        "module": "torch.optim", 
        "name": "Adam", 
        "attributes": {"lr": 0.0001}
    }, 
    "save": 
    {
        "record_frequency": 10,
        "batch_recorder": "record_segmentation_batch",
        "prediction_saver": "save_segmentation_prediction"
    }, 
    "validation": 
    {
        "whole_image_inference_frequency": 100, 
        "patch_overlap": 8, 
        "eval_frequency": 100, 
        "reporting_metrics": 
        [
            {
                "module": "segmentation.losses.dice_loss", 
                "name": "Dice",
                "method": "mean_dice_loss"
            }
        ]
    }, 
    "seed": 0, 
    "log_frequency": 10,
    "n_epochs": 500,
    "data_getter": "get_segmentation_data"
}
```
`"criteria"`, `"optimizer"`, `"save"`, `"validation"` and `"n_epochs"` are mandatory.

In the `"optimizer"` dictionary, `"name"` and `"module"` are mandatory. <br>
In the `"save"` dictionary, `"record_frequency"` is mandatory. <br>

#### visualization.json
This file defines the visualization parameters. It uses `PlotDataset` to make plots.
```json
{
    "kwargs": 
    {
        "subject_idx": [0, 1, 2, 3, 4], 
        "update_all_on_scroll": true,
        "nb_patches": 4
    },
    "set": "val"
}
```

#### extra_file.json
This file can overwrites `data.json`, `transform.json`, `model.json` and/or the results directory.
```json
{
    "transform": 
    {
        "train_transforms": [],
        "val_transforms": 
        [
            {
                "name": "RandomBiasField"
            }, 
            {
                "name": "RescaleIntensity", 
                "attributes": 
                {
                    "out_min_max": [0, 1],
                    "percentiles": [0.5, 99.5]
                }
            }
        ]
    },
    "results_dir": "eval_with_bias_field"
}
```

## Run the program
The main entry point of the program is the `segmentation_pipeline.py` file.
Therefore, in order to run the program, one can run the following command:
```shell script
python ./segmentation/segmentation_pipeline.py -f '/path_to_main_config_file/main.json' -r '/results_dir'
```
`-f` is the path to the main json configuration file.

`-r` is the path to the results directory. All saved files are saved to this directory,
including log files.

The `--mode` argument can take the following values:
- `"train"` (default value): the selected model is trained on training data and evaluated
on validation data;
- `"eval"`: the selected model is evaluated on validation data;
- `"infer"`: the selected model is used to make predictions on test data;
- `"visualization"`: a visualization of the data and eventually the predictions made by the
model is shown.

The `--debug` argument's default value is 0, if a different value is given, debug information
will be printed in the console.

The `--viz` argument is only used when `--mode` is `"visualization"`. Values ranging from
0 to 5 are accepted. Default value is 0.
- If value is 0: volumes are shown,
- If value is 1: volumes with labels are shown,
- If value is 2: volumes with patches are shown,
- If value is 3: volumes with patches and labels are shown,
- If value is 4: a volume with the fuzzy false positive map between the model prediction and 
the ground truth is shown,
- If value is 5: the model prediction and the ground truth on the same volume are shown.

The `--extra_file` argument allows to give a new configuration file to overwrite the
data, transform and model configuration files as well as the result directory. This aims
to allow evaluation on new data or transform without creating a whole new folder.

Commit message:

Log differences between new and existing configuration files before saving new ones

segmentation/README.md, after:

# Segmentation

This package aims to provide a generic code based on configuration files
to train a Pytorch neural network on a 3D segmentation task.

## Configuration files
A few configuration files are needed to run the code and should be referenced
in the `main.json` file (the name of the file is not important).

#### main.json
This file references all the configuration files needed to run the code.
```json
{
    "data": "some_path/data.json",
    "transform": "some_path/transform.json",
    "model": "some_path/model.json",
    "run": "some_path/run.json"
}
```
`"data"`, `"transform"`, `and `"model"` are mandatory. Depending on the mode the program is run
in, one additional key is needed:
- `"run"` if mode is `"train"`,`"eval"` or`"infer"`,
- `"visualization"` if mode is`"viz"` (not implemented yet).

#### data.json
This file tells the code where to find the data to use in the segmentation task and the repartition
between train, validation and test data. If `"subject_shuffle"` is `true`, subjects are shuffled
before being assigned to train, validation and test sets. <br>
Either patterns using unix regular expressions or explicit paths can be used to list subjects.
Both can be used at the same time (patterns are read first). <br>
This file also defines the behaviour of the `DataLoader`, using patches or not, the 
number of workers used to load data (`-1` means all available workers are used) and 
the batch size. Finally it sets which keys will be used to retrieve images and labels 
from subjects.
```json
{
    "modalities": 
    {
        "t1": {"type": "intensity"},
        "label": {"type": "label"}
    },
    "patterns": 
    [
        {
            "root": "/path_to_t1/*/",
            "name_pattern": "([0-9]+)", 
            "modalities": {"t1": "/T1w/T1w_acpc_dc.nii.gz"}
        }, 
        {
            "root": "/path_to_label/suj_*/", 
            "name_pattern": "([0-9]+)", 
            "modalities": {"label": "grey.nii.gz"}
        }
    ], 
    "repartition": [0.7, 0.15, 0.15],
    "subject_shuffle": true,
    "subject_seed": 0,
    "image_key_name": "t1",
    "label_key_name": "label",
    "batch_size": 2,
    "num_workers": 0,
    "queue": 
    {
        "attributes": 
        {
            "max_length": 8, 
            "samples_per_volume": 4
        }, 
        "sampler": 
        {
            "name": "LabelSampler",
            "module": "torchio.data.sampler",
            "attributes": 
            {
                "patch_size": 64,
                "label_name": "label",
                "label_probabilities": {"0": 0.1, "1": 0.9}
            }
        }
    },
    "collate_fn": 
    {
        "name": "history_collate",
        "module": "segmentation.collate_functions"
    },
    "batch_shuffle": true,
    "batch_seed": 0
}
```

```json
{
    "modalities": 
    {
        "t1": {"type": "intensity"},
        "label": {"type": "label"}
    },
    "paths": 
    [
        {
            "name": "subject1",
            "modalities": 
            {
                "t1": "/path_to_t1_for_subject1/T1w/T1w_acpc_dc.nii.gz",
                "label": "/path_to_label_for_subject1/grey.nii.gz"
            }
        }, 
        {
            "name": "subject2",
            "modalities": 
            {
                "t1": "/path_to_t1_for_subject2/T1w/T1w_acpc_dc.nii.gz",
                "label": "/path_to_label_for_subject2/grey.nii.gz"
            }
        }
    ], 
    "repartition": [0.7, 0.15, 0.15],
    "subject_shuffle": true,
    "subject_seed": 0,
    "image_key_name": "t1",
    "label_key_name": "label",
    "batch_size": 2,
    "num_workers": 0,
    "batch_shuffle": true,
    "batch_seed": 0
}
```
`"modalities"`, `"batch_size"`, `"image_key_name"` and `"label_key_name"` are mandatory. 
If `"patterns"` are not empty, each pattern must have keys `"root"` and `"modalities"`.
If `"paths"` are not empty, each path must have keys `"name"` and `"modalities"`. 
If `"queue"` is not empty, it must have the attribute `"sampler"` which must have keys
`"name"`, `"module"` and `"attributes"`. In such case, `"attributes"` must define the
attribute `"patch_size"`.


Any modality present in a pattern or a path must be present in `"modalities"` and
each subject must have every modality of `"modalities"`.

#### transform.json
This file defines which transforms (preprocessing and data augmentation) are applied to train,
validation and test samples. The same transforms are applied to validation and test samples.
```json
{
    "train_transforms": 
    [
        {
            "name": "RandomBiasField"
        }, 
        {
            "name": "RandomNoise"
        }, 
        {
            "name": "RandomFlip",
            "attributes": {"axes": [0]}
        },
        {
            "name": "OneOf", 
            "is_selection": "True",
            "transforms":
            [
                {
                    "prob": 0.8, 
                    "transform":
                    {
                        "name":"RandomAffine"
                    }
                }, 
                {
                    "prob": 0.2,
                    "transform":
                    {
                        "name":"RandomElasticDeformation"
                    }
                }
            ]
        }
    ], 
    "val_transforms": []
}
```
`"train_transforms"` and `"val_transforms"` are mandatory.

#### model.json
This file defines the model to use, its parameters and if it is loaded from a saved model.
If attribute `"last_one"` is `true`, it means that last saved model will be used. If no model
has been saved so far, a new model will be used. To use a model saved at a specific path,
`"last_one"` must be set to `false` and `"path"` must be filled with the path to the model.
```json
{
    "module": "unet", 
    "name": "UNet3D", 
    "attributes": 
    {
        "in_channels": 1, 
        "out_classes": 1, 
        "padding": 1, 
        "residual": true, 
        "num_encoding_blocks": 5, 
        "encoder_out_channel_lists": 
        [
            [30, 30, 30], 
            [60, 60, 60], 
            [120, 120, 120], 
            [240, 240, 240], 
            [320, 320, 320]
        ], 
        "decoder_out_channel_lists":
        [
            [240, 240, 240], 
            [120, 120, 120],
            [60, 60, 60],
            [30, 30, 30]
        ]
    },
    "last_one": true,
    "device": "cuda"
}
```

```json
{
    "module": "unet",
    "name": "UNet3D", 
    "last_one": false,
    "path": "/path_to_model"
}
```
`"name"` and `"module"` are mandatory.

#### run.json
This file defines
- the losses used to train the model (`"criteria"`),
- the optimizer (`"optimizer"`),
- the frequency at which logs are printed (`"log_frequency"`),
- how often the performances of the model are saved and which method is used for that (`"save"`),
- how often the model is evaluated on the validation set and which metrics are used to assess the 
quality of the segmentation on the validation set (`"validation"`). The model 
is saved after every evaluation loop on the validation set,
- how often inference on whole images is done, this is relevant only if patches are
 used during training (`"whole_image_inference_frequency"` in `"validation"`, this frequency is
 in number of epochs),
- the number of epochs,
- which methods are used to get tensors from data.
```json
{
    "criteria": 
    [
        {
            "module": "segmentation.losses.dice_loss", 
            "name": "Dice",
            "method": "mean_dice_loss"
        }
    ], 
    "optimizer": 
    {
        "module": "torch.optim", 
        "name": "Adam", 
        "attributes": {"lr": 0.0001}
    }, 
    "save": 
    {
        "record_frequency": 10,
        "batch_recorder": "record_segmentation_batch",
        "prediction_saver": "save_segmentation_prediction"
    }, 
    "validation": 
    {
        "whole_image_inference_frequency": 100, 
        "patch_overlap": 8, 
        "eval_frequency": 100, 
        "reporting_metrics": 
        [
            {
                "module": "segmentation.losses.dice_loss", 
                "name": "Dice",
                "method": "mean_dice_loss"
            }
        ]
    }, 
    "seed": 0, 
    "log_frequency": 10,
    "n_epochs": 500,
    "data_getter": "get_segmentation_data"
}
```
`"criteria"`, `"optimizer"`, `"save"`, `"validation"` and `"n_epochs"` are mandatory.

In the `"optimizer"` dictionary, `"name"` and `"module"` are mandatory. <br>
In the `"save"` dictionary, `"record_frequency"` is mandatory. <br>

#### visualization.json
This file defines the visualization parameters. It uses `PlotDataset` to make plots.
```json
{
    "kwargs": 
    {
        "subject_idx": [0, 1, 2, 3, 4], 
        "update_all_on_scroll": true,
        "nb_patches": 4
    },
    "set": "val"
}
```

#### extra_file.json
This file can overwrites `data.json`, `transform.json`, `model.json` and/or the results directory.
```json
{
    "transform": 
    {
        "train_transforms": [],
        "val_transforms": 
        [
            {
                "name": "RandomBiasField"
            }, 
            {
                "name": "RescaleIntensity", 
                "attributes": 
                {
                    "out_min_max": [0, 1],
                    "percentiles": [0.5, 99.5]
                }
            }
        ]
    },
    "results_dir": "eval_with_bias_field"
}
```

## Run the program
The main entry point of the program is the `segmentation_pipeline.py` file.
Therefore, in order to run the program, one can run the following command:
```shell script
python ./segmentation/segmentation_pipeline.py -f '/path_to_main_config_file/main.json' -r '/results_dir'
```
`-f` is the path to the main json configuration file.

`-r` is the path to the results directory. All saved files are saved to this directory,
including log files.

The `--mode` argument can take the following values:
- `"train"` (default value): the selected model is trained on training data and evaluated
on validation data;
- `"eval"`: the selected model is evaluated on validation data;
- `"infer"`: the selected model is used to make predictions on test data;
- `"visualization"`: a visualization of the data and eventually the predictions made by the
model is shown.

The `--debug` argument's default value is `0`, if a different value is given, debug information
will be printed in the console.

The `--safe_mode` argument's default value is `False`, if `True`, the user is asked if he
wants to proceed before overwritting an existing configuration file in the results directory.

The `--viz` argument is only used when `--mode` is `"visualization"`. Values ranging from
0 to 5 are accepted. Default value is `0`.
- If value is `0`: volumes are shown,
- If value is `1`: volumes with labels are shown,
- If value is `2`: volumes with patches are shown,
- If value is `3`: volumes with patches and labels are shown,
- If value is `4`: a volume with the fuzzy false positive map between the model prediction and 
the ground truth is shown,
- If value is `5`: the model prediction and the ground truth on the same volume are shown.

The `--extra_file` argument allows to give a new configuration file to overwrite the
data, transform and model configuration files as well as the result directory. This aims
to allow evaluation on new data or transform without creating a whole new folder.
